Initial implementation of key-value rate limits (#6947)
letsencrypt/boulder: ratelimits/README.md

# Configuring and Storing Key-Value Rate Limits

## Default Limit Settings

Each root key directly corresponds to a `Name` enumeration as detailed in
`name.go`. The `Name` enum is used to identify the particular limit. The `count`
value is used to determine the maximum number of requests allowed, within the
given `period` of time. The `burst` value is used to determine the maximum
number of requests allowed, at any given time.

```yaml
NewRegistrationsPerIPAddress:
  burst: 20

>   count: 20

Author: Good catch. All of our current rate limits operate in this fashion, but this new system will grant us more flexibility and we should show it off. I'll modify the burst values for each of my overrides to indicate that these are not always going to be the same.

  period: 1s
NewOrdersPerAccount:
  burst: 300
  count: 300
  period: 180m
```

> ## Override Limit Settings

Reviewer: Until that work gets done, it should be made explicitly clear there is no fall-through. Maybe add a TODO?

> ## Override Limit Settings

Author: I don't believe that I make the promise of fall-through anywhere in the documentation.

> ## Override Limit Settings

Author: > Until that work gets done, it should be made explicitly clear there is no fall-through. Maybe add a TODO?

I don't believe that I make the promise of fall-through anywhere in the documentation. I've gone ahead and added a TODO entry in the issue tracking this change.

1. The subscriber's IP address is used to generate a bucket key in the form of
   `NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22`. The Theoretical Arrival Time (TAT) for
   this bucket is set to the current time.

2. The subscriber's bucket is initialized with 19 tokens, as 1 token is removed
   to account for the current request. The request is approved, and the TAT is
   updated. The TAT is set to the current time, plus the inter-request time
   (which would be 1/20th of a second if we are limiting to 20 requests per
   second).

3. The subscriber is informed that their request was successful. Their bucket:
    - will reset to full in 50ms (1/20th of a second),
    - they can make another newFoo request immediately,
    - they can make 19 more requests in the next 50ms,
    - they do not need to wait between requests,
    - if they make 19 requests in the next 50ms they will need to wait 50ms before
      making another request and 1s to make 20 more requests,
    - thus if they make 1 request every 50ms, they will never be denied.

Now, the subscriber makes another request immediately:

4. The TAT at bucket key `NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22` is compared against

>    the current time and the burst offset. If the current time is less than the

Author: I've added a terminology section and done some rewording throughout.

   TAT minus the burst offset, this implies the request would surpass the rate
   limit and thus, it's rejected. If the current time is equal to or greater

>    than the TAT minus the burst offset, the request is allowed.

Author: Thanks! I've gone ahead and made this a little simpler.

# Configuring and Storing Key-Value Rate Limits

## Rate Limit Structure

All rate limits use a token-bucket model. The metaphor is that each limit is
represented by a bucket which holds tokens. Each request removes some number of
tokens from the bucket, or is denied if there aren't enough tokens to remove.
Over time, new tokens are added to the bucket at a steady rate, until the bucket
is full. The _burst_ parameter of a rate limit indicates the maximum capacity of
a bucket: how many tokens can it hold before new ones stop being added.
Therefore, this also indicates how many requests can be made in a single burst
before a full bucket is completely emptied. The _count_ and _period_ parameters
indicate the rate at which new tokens are added to a bucket: every period, count
tokens will be added. Therefore, these also indicate the steady-state rate at
which a client which has exhausted its quota can make requests: one token every
(period / count) duration.

## Default Limit Settings

> Each key directly corresponds to a `Name` enumeration as detailed in `name.go`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each key directly corresponds to a `Name` enumeration as detailed in `//ratelimits/names.go`.
```

> The Name enum is used to identify the particular limit. The parameters of a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Name` enum is used to identify the particular limit. The parameters of a
```

default limit are the values that will be used for all buckets that do not have
an explicit override (see below).

```yaml
NewRegistrationsPerIPAddress:
  burst: 20
  count: 20
  period: 1s
NewOrdersPerAccount:
  burst: 300
  count: 300
  period: 180m
```

## Override Limit Settings

Each override key represents a specific bucket, consisting of two elements:
_name_ and _id_. The name here refers to the Name of the particular limit, while
the id is a client identifier. The format of the id is dependent on the limit.
For example, the id for 'NewRegistrationsPerIPAddress' is a subscriber IP
address, while the id for 'NewOrdersPerAccount' is the subscriber's registration
ID.

```yaml
NewRegistrationsPerIPAddress:10.0.0.2:
  burst: 20
  count: 40
  period: 1s
NewOrdersPerAccount:12345678:
  burst: 300
  count: 600
  period: 180m
```

The above example overrides the default limits for specific subscribers. They
will be allowed to make twice as many requests as the default limits but will

> still be limited to the same burst as a regular subscriber.

Reviewer: but are still configured with the default burst limit settings for the respective rate limit type.

Author: I almost read this as though it promises fall-through to the default for the rate-limit.

Author: Mulling this over for a while I went with:

> The above example overrides the default limits for specific subscribers. In both
cases the count of requests per period are doubled, but the burst capacity is
explicitly configured to match the default rate limit.

Thanks.

### Id Formats in Limit Override Settings

> Id formats vary based on the Name enumeration. Below are examples for each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Id formats vary based on the `Name` enumeration. Below are examples for each
```

format:

#### ipAddress

A valid IPv4 or IPv6 address.

> Example: `NewRegistrationsPerIPAddress:10.0.0.1`

Reviewer: Add an example IPv6 addr too please.

#### ipv6RangeCIDR

A valid IPv6 range in CIDR notation with a /48 mask. A /48 range is typically
assigned to a single subscriber.

Example: `NewRegistrationsPerIPv6Range:2001:0db8:0000::/48`

#### regId

The registration ID of the account.

Example: `NewOrdersPerAccount:12345678`

#### regId:domain

A combination of registration ID and domain, formatted 'regId:domain'.

Example: `CertificatesPerDomainPerAccount:12345678:example.com`

#### regId:fqdnSet

A combination of registration ID and a comma-separated list of domain names,
formatted 'regId:fqdnSet'.

> Example: `CertificatesPerFQDNSetPerAccount:12345678:example.com,example.org`

Reviewer: It should be noted if these domains need to be sorted _exactly_ like boulder will check for them in the certificate.

> ## Bucket Key Definitions

Reviewer: An SRE would use this because it's quicker for boulder to process the file? I don't see the benefit after reading this section.

Reviewer: I understand now. This was discussing how its stored in memory. Whoopsidaisies.

> Bucket keys are the key used to lookup the bucket for a given limit and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A bucket key is used to lookup the bucket for a given limit and
```

subscriber. Bucket keys are formatted similarly to the overrides but with a
slight difference: the limit Names do not carry the string form of each limit.

> Instead, they apply the Name enum equivalent for every limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, they apply the `Name` enum equivalent for every limit.
```

So, instead of:

```
NewOrdersPerAccount:12345678
```

The corresponding bucket key for regId 12345678 would look like this:

```
6:12345678
```

When loaded from a file, the keys for the default/override limits undergo the
same interning process as the aforementioned subscriber bucket keys. This
eliminates the need for redundant conversions when fetching each
default/override limit.

## How Limits are Applied

Although rate limit buckets are configured in terms of tokens, we do not
actually keep track of the number of tokens in each bucket. Instead, we track
the Theoretical Arrival Time (TAT) at which the bucket will be full again. If
the TAT is in the past, the bucket is full. If the TAT is in the future, some

> number of tokens have been spent and the bucket is slowly refilling. If the TAT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of tokens will have been spent and the bucket will slowly refill. If the TAT
```

is far enough in the future (specifically, more than `burst * (period / count)`)
in the future), then the bucket is completely empty and requests will be denied.

Additional terminology:

  - **burst offset** is the duration of time it takes for a bucket to go from
    empty to full (`burst * (period / count)`).
  - **emission interval** is the interval at which tokens are added to a bucket
    (`period / count`). This is also the steady-state rate at which requests can
    be made without being denied even once the burst has been exhausted.

>   - **cost** is the number of tokens removed from a bucket for a single request.

Reviewer: This is interesting. We could have an endpoint that costs _more_ for some reason.

Author: Not just that, it gives us the ability to process a request that constitutes a batch of _Foo_ rather than a single _Foo_. We can then deduct from and refund to that bucket for the entire batch in a single operation.

  - **cost increment** is the duration of time the TAT is advanced to account
    for the cost of the request (`cost * emission interval`).

> For the purposes of this example, subscribers originating from a specific IPv4

Reviewer: Reiterate the code snippet showing the default values for this rate limit here.

address are allowed 20 requests to the newFoo endpoint per second, with a
maximum burst of 20 requests at any point-in-time.

A subscriber calls the newFoo endpoint for the first time with an IP address of
172.23.45.22. Here's what happens:

1. The subscriber's IP address is used to generate a bucket key in the form of

>    'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22'.

Reviewer: This isn't a bucket key as described in the bucket key section above. I think this would be (fake data) `82:172.23.45.22`.

Reviewer: This is a misunderstanding. Closing.

2. The request is approved and the 'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22' bucket is
   initialized with 19 tokens, as 1 token has been removed to account for the
   cost of the current request. To accomplish this, the initial TAT is set to
   the current time plus the _cost increment_ (which is 1/20th of a second if we
   are limiting to 20 requests per second).

3. Bucket 'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22':
    - will reset to full in 50ms (1/20th of a second),
    - will allow another newFoo request immediately,
    - will allow between 1 and 19 more requests in the next 50ms,
    - will reject the 20th request made in the next 50ms,
    - and will allow 1 request every 50ms, indefinitely.

The subscriber makes another request 5ms later:

> 4. The TAT at bucket key 'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22' is compared against

Reviewer: Same nitpick about bucket key.

Author: https://github.com/letsencrypt/boulder/pull/6947#discussion_r1265898410

   the current time and the _burst offset_. The current time is greater than the
   TAT minus the cost increment. Therefore, the request is approved.

5. The TAT at bucket key 'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22' is advanced by the
   cost increment to account for the cost of the request.

The subscriber makes a total of 18 requests over the next 44ms:

6. The current time is less than the TAT at bucket key
   'NewFoosPerIPAddress:172.23.45.22' minus the burst offset, thus the request
   is rejected.

> 

Reviewer: To break this down into my own terms,

1) 20 tokens, then first request happens
2) 19 tokens after that  initial request, a rate limit bucket now exists in memory for the client
3) N/A
4) 5ms later a request happens, 18 tokens left in the bucket
5) Over next 44ms, 18 more requests happen leaving 0 tokens left
6) There is 1ms remaining before the next emission interval, but the client has 0 tokens so they're rejected.
7) After 1ms the emission interval is reset and the client can make 1? new request

Author: Yep, you've got it right.
